The Project Gutenberg EBook of London as seen by Charles Dana Gibson, by 
Charles Dana Gibson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: London as seen by Charles Dana Gibson

Author: Charles Dana Gibson

Release Date: July 23, 2020 [EBook #62738]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LONDON ***




Produced by Chuck Greif (This file was produced from images
available at The Internet Archive)











                                LONDON

                              AS SEEN BY

                          CHARLES DANA GIBSON

                               NEW YORK

                        CHARLES SCRIBNER’S SONS

                              MDCCCXCVII

              Copyright, 1897, by Charles Scribner’s Sons

   Thanks are due to _Life_ and the _London Graphic_ for their kind
      permission to reproduce some of the drawings in this book.

                            TROW DIRECTORY

                   PRINTING AND BOOKBINDING COMPANY

                               NEW YORK




LONDON STREETS


[Illustration: The Rat Man]

AFTER a short journey through country divided by hedges into a green and
gold checker-board; thatched roofs disappear, and chimney-pots take
their place and flourish until you come to the Thames, where black
barges in mid-stream wait for the muddy tide to turn, between banks of
masts and smokestacks; then the Gothic buildings of Parliament, and “Big
Ben,” and Charing Cross Station; and in another moment you are in
London, riding through the never-ending restlessness of its streets in a
cab that you can afford, with your hat-box safe by your side and your
trunk up by the driver, and London with its history on all sides of you,
its wooden streets and polished side-walks and bright shop windows, and
at every corner small sweeps and big policemen, providing clean and safe
crossing, while push-carts dodge in and out between steaming bus-horses
and hansom cabs. This is always my first impression of London.

[Illustration: _Outside Morley’s_]

As all Americans arrive in London with sea-legs after a week of ship’s
cooking, it is doubly necessary to have been there before in order to
know where to go at once for an on-shore dinner and good rooms. But
before you arrive at either of these you once more become a part of the
city and again feel perfectly at home, as you look from your cab window
at theatrical lithographs to find out what is going on for that night;
and no transformation scene on the stage is more complete than your own,
from standing in the companion-way waiting for the ship’s run to be
posted, to a few hours later sitting in a London theatre watching the
stage rock from side to side.

I believe an American enjoys London more during his second visit. He is
sure to be older for one thing, and with very little left of the
prejudice he once had. He is not so apt to wear a sensitive patriotic
chip on his shoulder, and for this reason he will give London a better
opportunity to know him. If it is your second visit you have the
pleasure of recognizing familiar types and places. Your hotel porter may
remember you, and there may be one or two of the old waiters still left
in the dining-room. Nelson’s Column and the National Gallery are former
friends; also the recruiting sergeants, among them Sergeant Charley, the
best known of all. He has stood at the corner of the National Gallery
for many years, and has probably talked more country boys into Her
Majesty’s service, consoled more weeping mothers, and cheered more
disappointed maidens than any other man in the British army. There is no
better place in which Sergeant Charley can operate than Trafalgar
Square--or from which the stranger can begin London.

[Illustration: _Between Times, Leicester Square_]

[Illustration: _On Bond Street_]

The bewildering scene always reminds me of the art student I once saw
painting it from the steps of the gallery; and I thought then that if
the actors on the great stage in front of her could have seen the
hopeless condition of her canvas and her pale, worried face they might
have stood still for awhile. But the panorama has never stopped, and the
only quiet figures in Trafalgar Square are its bronze statues. There you
will see country boys looking, with admiring envy, at the smart uniforms
of the soldiers, and with terror at the dingy army of sandwich-men
shuffling through the gutter carrying advertisements of hot and cold
luncheons, Turkish baths, manicure parlors, and places of amusement,
serving, at the same time, as awful examples of what will happen to all
those who do not take the sergeant’s advice and become soldiers. Even
some of the street beggars are familiar. “The old rat-man” and his pets
find Brighton too dull in the winter, and come up to London for the
season, to mix once more in its streets, where all kinds of horses are
driven by as great a variety of men, from the pedler to the
powdered-wigged coachman. Cable-cars and trolleys would be sadly out of
place in London, and horseless carriages would be a calamity. There
should be no need to go faster than a horse can trot, and the best way
of all is to walk.

[Illustration: _Sergeant Charley_]

You can stand on a bridge while scows drift slowly under you, and St.
Paul’s sinks into the smoke and darkness, like the dissolving views at a
lecture on travel. It is quite proper that the underground railway
should be used mostly for advertising purposes; but the most gaudy
posters fail to brighten up those dingy tunnels, and no amount of speed
can compensate for the time you are away from the world over your head.
London is not a place to go under.

There is no reason to be lonely. No one ever knows London, and before
you have been there long you are showing Londoners about their own city
with the pride of a part owner in its history; for, to an American, the
old part of the city is his--as much so as the portraits of his
ancestors. The pictures may not be on his walls, but he stands as good a
chance of being like their originals as the man who owns the house in
which they hang.

[Illustration: _Hyde Park Corner_]




LONDON AUDIENCES


NOWHERE is caste more noticeable than in a London audience. A little
board fence divides the ground-floor of a theatre into orchestra stalls
and a pit. It would cost you ten shillings less and your social position
to sit on the wrong side of this fence. It does not follow that sitting
on the right side of it assures your position. But it does give you an
uninterrupted view of the stage. No hats are worn, and that alone makes
it worth extra charge. There is, in most of the theatres, room for your
knees, and in some, additional room for the man who goes out between the
acts, and people who arrive after the curtain is up. A London audience
is brilliant. Everyone is in evening dress, and the audience is often
more entertaining than the play. This is especially true on a first
night. At such times the pit is watched most anxiously by the
management, as the success of the piece generally depends on their
verdict. It has often occurred to me, when I have seen them on a stormy
night forming a line on the pavement outside the pit entrance, taking it
all seriously enough to stand there for hours before the doors were
opened, that by letting them inside the management might improve their
spirits, and they in their turn might be more gentle.

[Illustration: Outside the Pit Entrance]

And it has also occurred to me that the management might further improve
the spirits of their audience by doing away with women ushers, and by
selling the programme at the same time they sell the seat; for it is
hardly fair to the first act of a play to make it overcome the
fretfulness caused by annoying attendants before it can hope to amuse.
But the second act is sure to have a fair start, and if the play is good
from there on, it will have no reason to complain of the audience.

An Englishman’s memory begins with a pantomime. A Drury Lane audience
easily explains this, as a large portion of it is composed of children.
This is just as it should be. The only mistake is that each year the
clown and pantaloon have less to do. Last winter they only appeared in
front of the drop curtain, and had difficulty in entertaining the
audience until the next scene had been set. It is strange that this
should happen among people who are naturally so true to old friends. In
the place of harlequin’s tricks they have the aërial ballets and
electrical effects, and altogether a performance that can be done just
as well at the Empire or the Alhambra. This is dangerous, for it might
in time change the character of a pantomime audience.

[Illustration: _A First Night_]

[Illustration: _Small Wigs and Big Fees_]

[Illustration: _In the Lord Chief Justice’s Court_]

A fancy dress-ball in London is slow. The general orders are, “keep
moving along.” The man who manages the search-light, from one of the top
boxes, probably enjoys the ball the most. He certainly does more to help
it. The centre of interest is wherever he will have it. He can make a
dull costume bright, and a supper-party in one of the boxes proud; and
he can almost remove the gloom caused by the officials in black.

The greatest variety of expressions are to be seen in the audiences that
come together at the law courts. There is the never-changing face of the
judge, and the ever-changing face of the witness rocking from side to
side in his box, and there are the black-robed barristers with small
wigs and big fees, and pale law students crowding in at the doors and
filling the passage-ways; and in front of the long table that is covered
with papers and high hats sit those most interested in what is going
on--care-worn parents and women thickly veiled.

[Illustration: _In the “Whispering Gallery”_--A Small Loan]

The most interesting place of amusement for men is the National Sporting
Club. Every Monday night during the winter the sports of London meet
there in the same building that Colonel Newcome and his son once left
because they objected to Captain Costigan’s song. The Colonel would be
more amused there now, well-trained and scientific boxers from all the
world meet in a roped-in square, surrounded by an orderly crowd of
stock-brokers, bankers, and miscellaneous sporting characters, who wait
for the best man to win. Then they adjourn to a front room, and around
the bar and little tables they talk about by-gone fights and the men and
horses whose pictures cover the wall. Some find their way to the Strand,
where, in a supper-room called Marble Halls, every variety of sport in
all stages of luck, and actors from the neighboring theatres, discuss
the fight of the evening round by round.

[Illustration: _At the National Sporting Club_]

A Music Hall audience is the most demonstrative and amusing. It will
applaud the longest, hiss the loudest, and sometimes join in the chorus.
From the moment the numbers are posted announcing the next turn, it is
easy to tell what the performer’s reception will be. On both sides of
the orchestra are bars, and when a London barmaid stops work to listen
and laugh you may be sure that the turn is a good one. Last winter they
paid Dan Leno this compliment. The air is filled with tobacco-smoke, and
the calcium-light, on its way from the gallery to the stage, looks like
a sunbeam in a dusty hayloft.

[Illustration: _At the Pavilion_]




LONDON PARKS


[Illustration: _A Sidewalk Artist_]

THE first and most natural question asked of any city is “Show us your
people.” In answer to this, London may safely begin by pointing to its
parks, and especially so on any Sunday during the season, for on that
day you can best see how caste has assorted and parcelled the city off
into so many exhibits, as carefully arranged as the specimens in the
British Museum.

The walks in Hyde Park have their special social value, as much so as
the walks in life; and in the park or in life, whichever path an
Englishman uses, it is safe to suppose that his ancestors walked there
before him. The parks of London are handy. From a Piccadilly club window
can be seen sheep enough to fill a barn-yard, and a stone’s throw from
the Horse Guards is St. James’s Park with its duck island, where all
kinds of rare birds flock together; and their relatives in far-away
countries are no better fed than these happy exiles in the heart of the
great city, and the peacocks that ornament the banks of the Serpentine
are as happy as the boys who sail the toy-boats on that toy river.

[Illustration: _Sunday Morning near Stanhope Gate_]

Sunday is Hyde Park’s day “At Home,” and in the shape of a blue sky she
sends her invitation to all London, and her popularity is easily shown
by the number and variety of her friends. By long odds the best-looking
exhibit is to be seen during church-parade. It extends from Hyde Park
Corner to Stanhope Gate, and consists of the well-to-do, most of whom
probably first came to the park with their nurses and a little later
with their tutors, and they now come grown up and with white hair to pay
their respects to the good doctor of their childhood. They form what is
distinctly a Sunday gathering, and one as serious as a wedding. Seldom a
loud voice is heard. There is a feeling of rest throughout the whole
scene, and it is impossible to be there without entering into the spirit
of it. In the solemn throng that pass and repass I have seen a noisy
steamer acquaintance thoroughly subdued and looking like an undertaker
in a long coat and high hat. Everyone else seemed to have been there
from childhood. The old gentleman in the Row undoubtedly first appeared
there on Shetland ponies under the watchful eye of the groom. It is not
a thing to tire of, and Sunday after Sunday these well-dressed people
attend church-parade as seriously as they attend church. A little
farther into the park are the shopkeepers and domestics listening to the
band. Here you are likely to meet the real estate agent and tailor with
whom you have already had dealings. They are a distinct class, and very
different from the first exhibit. They keep their frock-coats carefully
buttoned, and are apparently not so much at their ease.


[Illustration: _HAMLET_]

[Illustration: _A Constitutional in the Park_]

[Illustration: _In the Row_]

[Illustration: _A Park Orator_]

Separated from these people by another social gulf, and toward Marble
Arch, are the unemployed listening to the park actors and park orators.
If you are tall enough to look over the heads of an English crowd you
will see in some of these groups strolling players at work. In the
centre of one group a short, red-faced park orator declares that a Prime
Minister has robbed him.

The farther away from these shady paths the sadder London is. Among them
foreigners feel at home. Little home-sick law students from India may
mope in Piccadilly, but in Hyde Park they look happy. Once there the
British soldier is no longer war-like; he becomes helpless and happy,
surrounded by nature and under the influence of some pink-cheeked
domestic.

In the early part of the day the parks are occupied by very young
people; the visitors become older with the day. The nurses and their
charges leave, and evening finds an old lady leaning on her husband’s
arm, walking slowly along their favorite path, while their carriage
follows at a little distance. And as night comes on they roll back into
the great city among the never-ceasing tread of feet, past the side-walk
artist sitting by his pictures on the pavement, looking anxiously at the
passers-by--and the park’s day is done--a curtain of darkness falls on
the great stage; the peacocks go to roost in its trees; the ducks are
undisturbed by wet dogs, and the Serpentine’s small fish are no longer
in danger of bent pins; and the park, London’s kind friend and good
physician, is resting.

[Illustration: _Church Parade_]

[Illustration: _After Hours_]




A DRAWING-ROOM


ON March 11, 1896, the first Drawing-room of that year was held at
Buckingham Palace. Through the courtesy of the Lord Chamberlain I was
given the entree to the palace on that day. As a Drawing-room is
strictly a feminine affair, it matters very little what a man may think
about it, for the line points of social advantages and the costly
costumes he seldom understands. Apart from the foreign ambassadors,
members of the Cabinet and attendants, men are not wanted and are seldom
seen. Women go in hundreds, and sit for hours in carriages, extending in
long rows down the Mall, while a crowd of curious idlers stare in at the
carriage windows, making audible personal remarks. At two o’clock the
palace gates are open, and the waiting continues in the different rooms
above stairs.

[Illustration: _Waiting_]

[Illustration: _A Barrier_]

[Illustration: _After Presentation_]

These rooms are divided by barriers, guarded by gentlemen of the
household, which prevents over-crowding. It is an extraordinary sight to
see room after room filled with nervous young girls and their more
composed mothers sitting in the unbecoming light of an afternoon sun,
with white plumes in their hair and the family jewels on their necks.
With the exception of a now and then whispered conversation, everything
is quiet until the barriers leading into the next room are opened; then
a rush follows and small pieces of lace, spangles, flowers, and ostrich
feathers are left on the floor. Mothers and daughters are separated.
After the confusion of finding each other, all is quiet for another
thirty minutes, when a rush for a better place in the next room begins.
A retired Colonel, the guardian of a barrier, noticing my interest and
my evening dress, asked me if I did not think it looked like an ostrich
farm. He pointed out his wife to me, and said a French hairdresser had
been at his house all that morning. The Colonel’s pretty wife looked it.
From there I crossed the ambassadors’ room and the picture-gallery,
where the people who have the entree wait, and entered the throne-room.
At that time there were three men in it; two of them, gentlemen of the
household, were standing on either side of the door. One of them told me
that the young officer with a bearskin hat on his arm, standing by a
long window overlooking the central court, was there to signal to the
band outside when the royal family entered, in order that they might
know when to play “God Save the Queen.” He also motioned with his head
toward a small door in one corner of the big red room, and said through
it the royal party would enter. I asked the same gentleman why
Drawing-rooms were not held in the evening. He said he did not know. At
this time the Prime-Minister, in a dark uniform with a blue ribbon
across his breast, entered the room, followed by Court dignitaries,
gentlemen ushers, and the Lord Chamberlain with his staff of office.
Then the little door opened, and while the band played “God Save the
Queen,” the Princess of Wales and the royal party filed in. Then there
was a low bow on both sides; the Lord Chamberlain took his position by
the Princess of Wales, and read from the cards handed him by the ushers
the names of those who were being presented.

[Illustration]

After the ambassadors and their wives came those having the entree;
after them those without. The white procession had started, and the
Drawing-room that had been rehearsed and looked forward to for years, as
far as each individual’s part in it was concerned, was soon over. At the
end of two hours there was another low bow, and the royal family filed
back through the little door. The bustle and waiting was transferred to
the grand hall below, where little olive-skinned Indian ladies of high
birth, and famous English beauties whose photographs could be bought on
Piccadilly, stood side by side until their carriages stopped the way.
Mothers and daughters passed between rows of Yeomen of the Guard to the
door, daylight, and the photographers; finally home, where tea is
arranged, and friends are gathered to hear about it.

I had a second opportunity to see a Drawing-room, and I am of the
impression that they must be very much alike.

[Illustration: _A Gentleman at Arms_]

[Illustration: _A Drawing-room Tea_]




LONDON SALONS


[Illustration: _An Early Departure_]

THE “season” begins about the time Parliament opens, and Parliament’s
opening and closing depends more or less on fox-hunting and
grouse-shooting. As the “season” approaches, town-houses are opened and
“green” servants are broken in; secretaries busy themselves with lists
and stationery, and the winter campaign begins immediately upon the
family’s return to town. As a London house is seldom needed for more
than the formal entertainments of a season, it is in most cases hired;
consequently, it is seldom attractive. Acquaintances are entertained in
the city, and friends are taken into the country to spend the week’s end
on the family estate, surrounded by the household gods and the most
attractive side of all England. There the future members of the House of
Lords, and the belles of some future Drawing-room, ride donkeys, and the
older people ride wheels and sit under English oaks and make little
water-color sketches, and it is easily seen why only social duties take
them to London.

[Illustration: _Distinguished Guests_]

By eight o’clock in the evening almost every other house that you see
will have a little red carpet stretching from its door to the curb, and
in some cases a temporary awning over it. The streets seem to be given
over entirely to carriages and hansoms carrying people to dinner. When
the last guest has arrived the carpet is taken in until later on, when
it again rolls back down the steps and across the pavement, between two
lines of footmen, while the butler whistles for hansoms, and half of
fashionable London goes to its own house, its club, or its lodgings. A
Member of Parliament, during a short recess, will leave the House and
drive miles to a dinner. He may arrive thirty minutes late, or leave
before the dinner is half over. A Quartermaster-General will leave the
War Office an hour earlier, because he has promised to go bicycling with
some young people, and an Editor will leave his paper and accompany his
wife to a tea.

[Illustration: _After Dinner_]

[Illustration]

[Illustration: _At Dinner_]

This interest in all things gives English people time for everything.

A London reception is bright and amusing. In the early part of the
evening statesmen, diplomats, and older people are in the majority; at
eleven o’clock those who have been to the play arrive, and a little
later the actors themselves. From the staircase people can best be seen.
It is always crowded by those who are on their way to pay respects to
the hostess in the hall above, and by those who have already done so and
are on their way down to the supper-room. Above and below a dense crowd
elbow and talk around and through you. You are slowly twisted past your
hostess and through the parlors, and then finally back to the staircase,
down which you can go as slowly as you please. No one is in a hurry--so
out into the early morning, between rows of uniformed coachmen standing
like sentries sleeping on their post.

[Illustration: _Your Hostess_]




LONDON PEOPLE


ONCE upon a time, judging by John Leech’s pictures of English women (who
could do almost everything in those days but manage their hoop-skirts),
they were all short and became instantly stout when they arrived at
forty. If Leech was right, English women must have changed very much
since then. It may be that they grew tall to more closely resemble Du
Maurier’s goddesses. In many cases they have succeeded, as may be seen
at Lord’s or at any fashionable race-course. There may not be a variety
of good looks, but one type is very beautiful. So strong is the family
likeness, they might all be handsome sisters. There was something very
sweet and lovable about that plump little woman of Mr. Leech’s. I only
met her in reality after she had grown into a sweet old lady, and I
should have regretted not having seen her before had I not seen her tall
granddaughters.

[Illustration: _Patiently Listening_]

The fact that Phil May is a prophet in his own country should alone
clear Englishmen of the suspicion that they are slow to see fun. On an
Englishman’s love of fair play and good sport no suspicion has ever
rested. It is the most attractive thing about him, and it is only
natural that the greatest assortment of good-natured people are to be
found at the Derby. I had already met them in May’s drawings, and I was
prepared to find the good-nature contagious. Last year a party on a
coach opposite the Royal box and a policeman, who looked after that
particular part of the course, drank champagne out of the same bottle.
When the Prince of Wales came down to lead Persimmon off the track,
short men stood on boxes and balanced themselves by holding on to
whoever stood next to them. Gypsy fortune-tellers and painted-faced
minstrels climbed on the backs of coaches. Everyone shouted together and
probably wished that the Prince had been a little taller, so that they
might all have seen him.

[Illustration: _At the Savoy_]

[Illustration: _Phil May_]

[Illustration: _George du Maurier_]

English-speaking people have been introduced to each other by a long
line of clever draughtsmen. They have laughed together about the same
people in the truest and sweetest-natured way in all the world. Above
all others, one hand awakened the interest resulting in people knowing
themselves and others better. The beautiful was safe in that gentle
hand. Although the heart that guided it no longer beats, the human
interest and kindly feeling that it awakened will live forever, and all
the world has placed among the foremost men of his day the
affectionately remembered name of George Du Maurier.

These drawings were made among the most hospitable people I ever met.
When I have failed, it has not been owing to a lack of interest, but
more likely on account of a consciousness that my results would fall
short of my desires. The disappointments following the completion of a
drawing made from a beautiful woman are many. In these portraits I have
the most to regret.

[Illustration: _The Queen_]

[Illustration]














End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of London as seen by Charles Dana Gibson, by 
Charles Dana Gibson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LONDON ***

***** This file should be named 62738-0.txt or 62738-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/2/7/3/62738/

Produced by Chuck Greif (This file was produced from images
available at The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
